well magicians are sort of hacking into
our brains but so do all artists and
magicians are great manipulators of our
attention and our awareness people want
to believe their own senses and you find
the limits to those senses and go beyond
them and then people are stupified the
fun of magic is partly being amazed the
fun of magic is also partly figuring it
out if you can it's okay to be thinking
that way if you succeed you're happy and
if you fail you're happy it's just a no
loose situation on
Magic this is Star Talk special edition
Neil degrass Tyson here your personal
astrophysicist I got it with me of
course Gary O'Reilly Gary hi Neil Gary
and Chuck is on Hiatus bring him back in
it soon yeah yep we just uh give a break
yeah so what have you cooked up for us
today well ever wondered how a magician
pulls off their tricks is it smok and
mirrors is it magic are they in your
head but how can you violate the laws of
physics so it has to be magic right but
you can't mess with the laws of physics
so does this mean that magicians have a
deep understanding of our sensory
perceptions do they have understanding
of complexities of Neuroscience for that
we need to get a magician to talk
that'll be his job and uh we'll need an
expert in the field of attentional
misdirection in stage magic that'll be
someone else's job so Neil if you would
introduce our guests I would be
delighted to good we have Professor
Susana Martinez K professor of
Opthalmology I'll learn how to pronounce
that one day to be said slowly slowly
neurology physiology and pharmacology at
Sunni down state medical center right
here in Brooklyn here in New York City
in fact we're in Manhattan now in my
office at the Hayden planetarium so this
was an easy date to have just coming up
here from Brooklyn and where she's the
director of the laboratory for
integrative Neuroscience welcome to Star
Talk hi thank you for having me yeah and
we are reminded that you were a guest 10
years ago on one of our shows and we
have to dig that one out of the archives
also an author oh yes yeah even
earlier so you're an expert on Illusions
and perceptions and how the brain
allocates attention in ways that leave
us susceptible to Illusions and magic
and maybe that's a good thing if we were
not susceptible there would be no magic
that's true I don't want to live in that
world I want a world without magic what
was that that's not a good World feature
it's not a bug thank you it's a feature
it's not a bug I love it and you're
author from now 2011 a book still
selling well slights of Mind nice love
that title and more recently champions
of Illusion in
2017 and you co-wrote an essay with
teller uh pen and Teller because I was
hanging out with teller and I said I
can't hang out with him unless I get
something for the show this is going to
be hard work so yeah I interviewed
teller for this show so that you could
tell us and and inform us and Enlighten
us basically you're going to pull off
the magic trick of the year and get the
magician that doesn't talk to talk he'll
talk to me I don't know about you but
tell me and tell her with ti spoiler I'm
going to hear him oh yes we have him
others will hear him yes but not live
it's from a recording uh so yeah I I'd
like knowing what the limits of the
human mind are and
Susanna this is your career not just
Neuroscience but that aspect of
Neuroscience well the Neuroscience of
Illusion in general I think is at the
heart of my career and Illusions are so
interesting to neuroscientists because
Illusions are this discrepancy between
reality and perception so if you
understand what the brain is doing when
you experience an illusion that's really
what a whole lot of Neuroscience is
about yeah so you'll understand it but
the person having the illusion doesn't
they think it's real in some way well
what happens with some Illusions is that
even if you know they're not real you
know your brain is tricking you but you
can't make yourself see it any other way
so there's a there's a disconnect there
can be a disconnect in illusion how are
you able to manipulate our senses these
in the end are our first line of defense
for survival yes we hear we see we smell
and taste and yeah and and touch we're
so easily fooled well you're saying if
we're so easily fooled how did we last
this long species well again it's
because Illusions are useful there's
this misunderstanding that Illusions are
something that we should try to get rid
of but in fact Illusions make us faster
more able you got to explain to me how
yeah not seeing reality as it is is
somehow to our survival benefit well for
one see in reality exactly as it is we
don't have the neural Machinery that can
do that we just don't have the hardware
or the software that would be necessary
the computing power would be disastrous
and so metabolically and just think
about reaction times we don't need to
see reality as it is we need to see
reality as close enough so we can make
it out alive interesting CU we can't see
the flapping of the wings of a
hummingbird MH but if we did that would
require require much more processing
power in our brain and in our eyes so we
need upgrades
up but I guess that that was not
important to our survival exactly you
don't maybe if you're a hummingbird that
would be important to your survival to
see hummingbird see we've created our
own simulation in a certain sense don't
say that that's scary I know but you
know what cross the road you're saying
our version of reality is our own
simulation it is a construct that's
you're Absol correct word yeah well I
like the word simulation too and that
because we we're making it up we
construct more than reconstruct we we
take little bits and pieces of the
information that comes in and we make up
a whole lot of the rest so we do create
a grand simulation put it that way it
makes me wonder we get bits and pieces
of reality that if they don't otherwise
make sense we try to make sense out of
it and the sense making can be fraught
with all kinds of error the brain is a
Storyteller we tell ourselves stories
about what's happening he may have
nothing to do with reality and Magic is
a great example of connecting cause and
effect in a way that is not true wow I
know so if that's the case that's so
succinct of course I have nothing else
to add to this whole show just you're
not getting off that lightly sit still
so if that is the case then magicians
for thousands and thousands of years
have understood this and found ways to
take us on a journey tell a story and
use our own senses and our own brains
wiring against us well magicians are not
using any type of neural Pathways that
we don't use otherwise so they're
they're sort of hacking into our brains
but so do all artists when we see a you
know a painting a a masterpiece or we uh
listen to music all of these artists and
um creators are hacking into our brain
so of speak to produce certain
Sensations certain emotions and
magicians are great manipulators of our
attention and our awareness what is true
about someone who becomes a magician
that they arrive at that place when the
rest of us don't is it a curiosity is it
they want to take advantage of people is
it because they
evil think about it well no it's the the
Dark Art I think there's probably a
sense of um curiosity that lead people
to be magicians and and scientists as
well and I think that that's why we have
this great potential for a collaboration
because we both care from different you
and Teller himself yeah we care about
the workings of the mind yes we approach
it differently but there's an overlap
well let's let's go to my first clip
yeah let I mean the first clip basically
tell her tell tells us he's in our heads
he's in our head okay and then we'll
talk on the back of it let's see what
but there is one circumstance in which
we can make a mistake and just enjoy it
and that's magic because magic is kind
of the playground for this very
important thing of how we ascertain
truth but it requires you understand
people better than they understand
themselves Yes except I have time to to
plan this out I have time to plot this
and I have time to really say plot is
the right word plot yeah I I have time
to to say if I were in that position
what would fool me and so I'm I'm doing
this great service for them of
harmlessly fooling them with an idea
that's that in is in some way enchanting
it doesn't have to be Supernatural it
can be just funny and sometimes it is
sort of weird weirdly Supernatural
looking but I enjoy being in both places
at the same time and I enjoy the other
thing I love when I'm when I'm composing
a a thing I love thinking from moment to
moment what would I be thinking if I
were watching this right now where would
my attention go that's what any good
educator should be doing always having a
minute-by-minute understanding what's
going on in the mind of the student or
the audience and but you do this you
take this to extreme levels because
people want to believe their own senses
and you find the limits to those senses
and go beyond them and then people are
stupified
stupified stupified so you know where
those limits are some of them uh if I
knew where all the limits are I wouldn't
be a scientist because there wouldn't be
anything else to
discover yes on the frontier of the
limits how far can we be taken with that
perceived boundaries of our senses and
still be fooled is there that limit
where oh that's that's never going to be
it's too too far away from our senses
for it not to be able to succeed as a
trick so if you're manipulating our
senses and how you move with them how
far can you or are there no boundaries
well I would say that um what interests
me most in terms of uh some of what
magicians bring to the table is that uh
it is surprising from a neuroscience
perspective some of the methods that
magician use they can be kind of crude
and they still work amazingly and so
really our brain is not I mean this can
be done with great Artistry and skill of
course but our brains are just not that
hard to trick if you get at the heart of
it we just don't think about it and we
don't realize on an everyday basis but
we're being tricked all the time so are
you thinking like if there's a
battleship parked in the in the harbor
and I just raise my hands and the
battleship lifts out of the water you're
saying oh you didn't really do that
that's not magic you're not too far
beyond much but we've all seen the
movies where the villain does exactly
that yes the B villains kind of so all
right using the title of your book
slights of Mind best title ever still
best title slights of mind I love it I
love it why haven't we evolved to see
through these why are we still here this
far into our Evolution falling for it
because we don't have to and that uh
Evolution will not lead to optim ization
but just good enough and what we have is
good enough and that you want to be
making rapid decisions and that has have
fast reaction time and be as efficient
as you can with the resources you have
and that uh what does an extra 10 20
even I don't know 30 40% give you in
terms of uh understanding reality for
what it is and that uh is just not that
useful at the end of it and having these
Illusions in fact this is the correlate
of uh the brain processes that make us
efficient like the uh magicians play
with our attention they they manipulate
our attention they we call talk about
misdirection yes and this is a side
effect of the fact that we can focus our
attention none of us can multitask but
magicians force you to multitask but you
don't want to be multitasking that's
going to make you worse at life so you
want to be single tasking right so again
it's a feature so let me get a more
precise example here so I'm running in
the
brush and I see a lion and it starts
running after me I'm not going to
process all the information in that
scene other than that I might
die yes so and then I run away or I
climb a tree so what information would
be distracting to me in that moment and
that's sort of situation there's a lion
running at you and you see a big blurry
heavy thing fast approaching you you
want to get away if you're able to
survive you may actually realize hey it
wasn't a lion it was actually a tiger so
[Music]
what oh I could have said I could have
stayed there and say I think that's a
lion but maybe it's a tiger I'll let it
get closer I want to make absolutely
sure actually it's not clear what
continent that would be on I don't think
they coexist but they do in the Wizard
of O lions and tigers and
bears so I have the capacity to see the
teeth of the lion count the teeth make a
judgment how white they are how is it a
female lion or a male lion I could think
all of that is this the example of
things your brain could be doing but is
not doing because you have a higher
singular priority exactly and it would
be a mistake to want to do these things
and to make sure because it's just
pointless and what you care about is
just get away as fast as possible so
this is this is the point tell's making
in that last clip ascertain the truth so
the truth of the matter is I need to
focus exactly on the furry thing with
the big claws and the large teeth and
not get cluttered and have distraction
this is this is a magician and
understanding our awareness and our
attention I'm guessing this is how
they've worked out that if we can now
maneuver around certain things I can get
this would you call it a cognitive
illusion so when we talk about cognitive
Illusions we mean those that involve
so-called cognitive processes such as so
that's a different thing completely
memory decision well all all the it all
plays into magic like I I often think
about magic tricks as the layers of an
onion so you have sensory misperceptions
and you have more cognitive uh effects
and and so on and they they all sort of
work together but in terms of truth I'm
not so sure that we can access truth
even from a magic perspective or from a
scientific perspective from a scientific
perspective truth is whatever is left
out after you've removed everything that
is false but uh truth is an ideal and
your truth with your brain is going to
be different from the truth from the
hummingbird's brain and the tiger brain
and so forth you all but still the truth
see different truths and that are maybe
none of them
is I mean she knows me so
well he just meant the professors worked
me out so in the day before your
profession became a thing our best
access to what was going on in the human
brain was through the work of
psychologists you know they lay you down
on the couch and just ask you questions
but now you you can get in there and
look at neuros synapses and things and
you're you're synapse fluent but uh in
this next clip we we talk about just the
overall interest that psychologists have
in Magic so let's see what teller has to
say about psychologists and our senses
okay let's check it out so are you a
part-time or full-time psychologist
I I certainly we we deal with psychology
do psychologists come to you
psychologists like magic they're very
interested in Magic and there more and
more work is being done by serious
psychological students on Magic so of
the senses uh we typically think a a
sight gag or you fool someone from for
what they see or for what they hear
these are two common senses very
important senses but we have other
senses sense of touch sense of smell
sense of taste have you you guys
considered exploiting those senses to
your own gain as well we have not I mean
those are those are harder to do but
partly because a large audience can see
a large audience can hear a large
audience can smell but but to rely on
smell I me we one of the things that we
the smell doesn't move at the speed of
light no nor the speed of sound one of
the things that we do which I won't
won't detail right now but in our live
show does indeed convince people by
smell it's just very subtle they don't
even know that it's happening oh oh okay
this is your live show at the Rio yes in
Las Vegas this is your own theater if
memory serves this is our own theater
it's uh we've been there for more than
20 years we're the longest running
Headliners in the history of Las Vegas
crazily I I would never more than Elvis
come on now no yes we are the longest
running Headliners in the history of Las
Vegas not better not better than Elvis
God no a testament to The Perennial
appeal of the trade of magic so Susanna
can you pick up on the ideaa that when
we think of Illusions we typically only
think of what you can see or hear as an
illusion are there famous illusions that
involve our other senses yeah we do have
a lot of uh there are tactile Illusions
there are multi sensory Illusions in
fact I would go and even say that in
Magic if we're talking about theatrical
pickpocketing for instance there are
touch illusions that play a big role
because the magician the pig pocket is
uh touching the the volunteer the the
person that that they're stealing from
and that uh first off some touches
they're not noticing and they're using
other touches to direct their attention
foring them to multitask across the
senses and the movement the direction
and of the movement of a hand has
another distractive yes that's that's
the visual component but uh but we're
talking about the patter of the magician
so that's already an auditory component
you have the visual you have the touch
and you have the internal dialogue as
well that the magician is generating
because not everything is happening in
the senses but when the magician gets
you to ask yourself a question now your
attention is drawn inwards and you
cannot really perceive what's happening
outside so he the magician will get you
to power down certain other aspects
while you fire up to answer the question
yeah absolutely some magician I believe
it was aruro de asano and that ju Mar
talks about the discombobulating
question and that's a question that the
magician asks the audience and it could
it can be something very simple like um
I need a scarf has anybody brought a
scarf at that moment everybody's
thinking did I bring a scarf and uh
while you're asking yourself if you were
a scarf you're not paying attention to
what's happening on stage distraction so
in my conversation with teller which he
was kind enough to Grant MH I was
invited to his home uh outside of Las
Vegas and I was just delighted to hear
perspectives of someone who's been in
the business that long and for me what I
liked was the humility and the humanity
of his motives yeah his motives are not
to make fun of you not to he will say
upfront I'm about to trick you and then
trick you there are magicians where
susceptible people think they're
actually wielding Powers m Supernatural
Powers they come right out because
they're very big in the Skeptics
movement and they want to disavow people
of you know whatever is the belief
system they were drawn into because
they're being there's a charlatan at the
top of that pyramid that's fooling you
and and since they also fool you they
don't want to ever be confused with
people who were exploiting you or taking
advantage of you and so I deeply
appreciated that aspect of his act with
with pen of course we hardwired
if we can't work out something then we
can't trust it is it as simple as that
our our nature is to well I can't trust
that because I can't understand it work
it out I don't think that we typically
dig so much beneath the surface I think
that we your smartphone can you figure
it out you trust your I think that we
tend to accept things at face value and
I think that that's why it's so
important magicians like teller and pen
and others that are active in the
skeptic Community cuz magic I think as
science those can be great tools but
magic of course it with its
entertainment value can be so great to
promote critical thinking especially in
younger people oh promotion of critical
thinking something that Science is based
on it's based on yeah but the magician
who also cares about that such as pen
and Teller you come out of that just a
little more enlightened a little more of
a critical thinker than you started cuz
that's part of their statement yeah and
that's the magic trick you don't even
know that you're learning critical
thinking well I like that yeah if I can
teach you and you don't even know you're
teaching that's a magic trick I'll take
it got another clip coming up oh yeah
what's that for me tell her when he's
talking to you if you use the stage
scenario just pulls back the curtain
just a bit and you can see there's
something but you don't quite see what
it is and he mentions in this clip about
shortcuts so let's play the clip okay
let's see many times what we're doing is
taking things that are very beneficial
shortcuts that we always use and saying
well you know if you don't pay careful
attention that shortcut can mislead you
I mean a standard thing we we use
shortcuts all the time if you see
something done and then you see it done
again you assume it's done the same way
why not of course in Magic we take
advantage of that by doing something one
way let's say I produce a coin and and
then I I I I produce another one I
produce another one and I produce
another one and now you're saying oh
he's just got the coins in his hand and
at that moment I pluck the coin in a way
that shows you that my hand is empty and
I keep doing it so that your shortcut of
saying he's doing it the same way every
time is not making it easy for you it's
not making it easy for you to follow
because I'm taking advantage of it what
a devil yeah but it so what what would a
neuroscientist
phrase that as if if we this just okay
I'm like predictive text I'm predicting
that because the the the balls get
thrown up and it does it twice and third
time the hand moves but there's no ball
but I I assume that I've predicted that
that's happening so so we we talk about
filling in processes and the filling in
processes can be at a very sensory level
like the fact that uh in our retina we
have a big hole in our retina which is
where the optic nerve leaves the eye but
uh it's a whole we it's not sensitive to
light or to any information in Fr we are
we are blind it's it's called a blind
spot literally we have no photo
receptors there but we don't see and
every time that we close one eye we
should see a big hole near the center of
our vision but we don't because our
brain takes the information from outside
the hole and uses us to fill in what
should be there damn so damn but that's
that's a a very sensory process but the
sort of like the same concept applies to
more cognitive processes and we use this
in everyday life all the time like um
you're my friend and you introduced me
to your good friend I don't know this
person but uh now I I like this person
because I like you and that person is
your friend exactly so so we apply this
B and B like C then a lik c yeah we do
this without realizing but that's
different from the this case where you
assume it's true because it's repeated
yes in front of you yes and so so it's
not just a
oneoff assumption it's an assumption
that has legitimate foundation for
making as Susanna says you're filling in
so you can st stop allocating your
attention because you already know
what's going on this is not going to
further increase your survival going
back to evolutionary issues but uh now I
know that I'm going to pay attention to
something else now something that I
don't know already to me the foundations
of propaganda are it's information that
you kind of are interested in and then
gets repeated and then later on you just
assert it as truth because you've seen
it repeated yes and it didn't even have
to be demonstrated to be true it just
had to be stated as true that's a
susceptibility isn't it yes absolutely
and even I believe that there are
studies even showing that even knowing
that is false the act of
repetition generates
certainty the knowledge that it's false
the familiarity effect yeah that's what
it's called okay yeah so is that a
similar thing to if you were reading
some text and there's a word in there
and you've got you're about to get to it
but you don't see it correctly and you
assume it is something
else so you miss really what it's being
said but it's it plants there's another
word that your brain puts in front of
you have you probably don't do that
because you concentrate abely well it's
just bird brains like me you ever taught
how to
read not properly obviously you've seen
this text where you have the word the
repeated twice and you don't see the
repetition because you sort of skip over
it and so especially if it ends one line
it begins another line yeah so is there
a term for that in in in in the
neuroscientist world when we do this
blind spot possibly yeah simple as that
perhaps I'm just thinking of it being
the awareness of a magician to think I'm
going to set you up with one two and
then the third one is not going to be
what you think it is you then the
Assumption and the fact is that as
you've said already we do not pay enough
attention there is a general brain
principle which is which we call
redundancy reduction and the Brain often
operates to remove redundancy and from a
very simple visual perspective we know
for example
that Corners have more information than
straight lines straight lines have more
information than the inside of of things
if we're talking about just a plain
surface so even when we construct a
visual percept our brain is using
information from the corners from the
edges not from the insid because that's
all redundant I've seen it all I know
what's there I don't need to process it
so redundancy reduction I think that's
the general principle that you're going
for thank you yeah so this whole idea I
think I didn't have your official term
for it but I think I came up with my own
phrase in conversation with teller and
let's find out all right magic works
because people are
lazy are sensorially lazy in that we
make assumptions that are just not true
in your case but they're true for every
other case we experience in life mhm and
the the the example that I gave earlier
of when you see something done a second
time you think it's done the same way as
it was the first time and that's
absolutely practical right for every
Everyday Use you don't want to have to
think about every uh intersection that
you drive your car through as a
completely different experience you
couldn't live no you have you have to
use these shortcuts and evolutionarily
that probably helped us survive
absolutely no no doubt about it but
those are also things that those are
cracks that you can play with in Magic
and the the fun of magic is partly being
amazed the fun of magic is also partly
figuring it out if you can you know it's
it's okay to be thinking that way there
are certain magicians over the over the
last I don't know 40 years who have
going oh don't try to think about how
how magic is done just set aside your
intelligence and become as a stupid
child no you know I I don't agree with
that that's right nobody does nobody
wants to do that the fun part is trying
to figure it out and and failing at that
if you succeed you're happy and if you
fail you're happy it's there a no lose
situation on Magic that so Magic's all
about being happy that that was a
brilliant take on it what's interesting
Neil is you see a magician who wants to
make you happy isn't here trying to make
you
feel but is so conscious of our
mind and where the cracks are and how
they the word crack yeah can for I mean
how many
sensory mind
little chasms and cracks do we have that
people like T can just wander through
all of them that many it's one big Chasm
is what you're saying yes and and all
artists have to be a successful artist
has to produce some kind of emotion all
great artists about emotion and you have
to have that intuition you know we just
uh recently published a paper out of my
lab in which uh we were left wondering
these changes this uh in rubben when he
was the the painter Ruben the painter
Ruben so rubben was for nine months of
his life he was actually copying
paintings of tishan in Spain he was
there as a diplomat but that's that's
another story but he was making copies
of tishan but introducing his own
changes and the way that he changed the
composition we found out in the lab that
is drawing observers attention ition
much in the way that a magician might
and we got left to wonder well did he do
this on purpose or he intuitively knew
what he was doing or he actually knew it
how did he arrive to this understanding
of the human mind to be able to
manipulate the attention of the Observer
you can ask the same questions about
magicians you do this with with sensors
on people's eyes and what they focus on
first we did this with high tracking yes
yes yeah I mean and it's the depth per
and the placement of certain figures in
certain areas always drawn to the center
you see points well what what Ruben was
doing was more sophisticated because he
was using the Gaze direction of the
characters in his paintings so you know
we call this joint attention like if I
look up you're going to look up to see
what I'm looking at but um IM magicians
do this too magicians say if I want the
audience to look at me I'm going to look
straight at the audience if I want the
audience to look at an object then the
magician will look at the object
themselves but rubben was doing this
with the directions of the gazes in his
painting there's a famous painting
Adavan Eve and everybody's gaze is
pointing at 's face and guess where
people look at when they watch the
painting how do you get inside people's
heads to do your research or is it all
from the exterior do you put in probes
and things but my nightmare of the
neuroscientist is you just find any way
you can to get inside people's brains
but we we've uh we do a lot of eye
tracking and that um we also do um
occasionally fmri but uh but uh but
we're very interested in eye movements
because the ocul motor system spans the
whole brain like uh from the frontal
loes to the brain stem cerebellum you
name it so it's virtually impossible I
have never found the situation in which
neurological condition or impairment or
brain State doesn't affect the pattern
of your eye movements so the the eyes
are very much in the mve the windows to
the mind in this case so when you talk
about the windows in the mind I mean red
magicians talk about change blindness
where you organize an event and the the
brain doesn't quite cope and then
there's something called after discharge
is this the same thing that this is
being manipulated well these are
different kinds of phenomena change
blindness that's a type of attention
illusion basically there's a change and
that uh often there's an interruption a
before and and after but you don't you
don't notice the change so you're blind
to the change that has happened and it
tends to be a very obvious change that
you would think beforehand I would catch
that for sure when that is not the case
but why why so I mean I maybe as a
scientist things that are different
especi interest me so if I see something
different I'm all on it like I will not
miss now how do I don't know you think I
miss I don't know how many changes I've
missed can I have this if I didn't I I
don't know how many changes I've missed
but I'm pretty good at continuity in
movies okay yes well that's exactly what
we're talking about these continuity
errors that you would see in movies
that's what change blindness is well
except that if I wouldn't notice the
continuity error if I had changed
blindness so there was someone in the
scene and they were like carrying a you
know some kind of thing over their
shoulder and there was another scene
like instantly later and it's he's on
its other shoulder now I didn't remember
noticing that but the fact that it was
different say wait a minute something's
wrong about this scene I went back yep
they didn't the continuity missed it so
I'm I'm picking up the change that
seemed like the opposite of what you're
saying yeah well a lot of people don't
and for sure in any magic trick there's
going to be some people that catch it
but the majority want and that uh and
also magicians they rely
majority so it's it's hiding in plain
sight yes but but but change blindness
is only part of it and I think it's
actually a relatively small fraction of
the attentional manipulation The
Magicians do they rely I believe far
more on inattentional blindness than
change blindness which is as the name
indicates you don't see it because
you're not paying attention or you're
paying attention to the wrong place or
the wrong time you've been misdirected
so this is what they always said that
the the male magician always has a
beautiful woman on stage with him and
everyone's looking at the beautiful
woman at any time he needs you to so
that he can slip something else the
magician will orchestrate your gaze to
the said beautiful young lady yes
actually one of the ways that magician
say is the most effective way to just
misdirect the audience is to bring a
volunteer on stage because that becomes
all of us yes and that uh the audience
attention is going to be focused on the
volunteer and I've seen more of that
lately than the old style yeah you know
scantly clad woman on the stage and even
humor Johnny Thompson the great Thon he
he died a few years ago was one of the
magicians that we collaborated with he
used to say that when the audience
laughs time stops and the magician can
do anything
oh that's the secret to the universe if
you want the time travel just just get
the universe to
laugh time stops exactly so right let's
go to our next clip and strangely enough
manipulation and tell us thinking about
manipulation all right am I accurate to
characterize what you do as knowing
where a person's sensory limits are and
then stepping Beyond them and
manipulating them in ways they don't
even know is that a fair way to
characterize primarily magicians do not
use things that are Beyond everybody's
normal uh experience for example if
something is floating on stage and you
don't you don't see how it can be
floating floating in the air yeah yes
it's it's not because you haven't seen a
spiderweb it's the same Principle as the
spiderweb the spiderweb is something
that's part of your world magicians just
frame that in a way that makes it hard
for you to think of spiderweb so the all
of these things are very familiar to us
look at the edge of your uh MacBook Air
computer right it looks really thin but
look at the whole computer and it's it's
three or four times thicker than that we
judge the thickness of something by its
Edge magicians know that and make use of
that but this is not something that is a
an obscure principle we hold things in
our hands all the time magicians do that
all the time they call it palming it's a
use of something that you know about
every day but that is in placed in a
context where it's hard to recognize so
is he in in saying all of that using
these every so-called everyday items
does that create a comfort zone for the
audience I like yeah where if I brought
something weird strange abstract oh
that's got to be the bad guy that's got
to be the trick but by using these
everyday items we fall into a comfort
with this it's a false sense of
familiarity you think you're familiar
you assume you're familiar but in
reality it's a different situation that
presents in everyday life I was in a
theater in Pacific Northwest it might
have even been Portland where each chair
had a little cage underneath all right
and I said what's this for and they said
oh that's with the gentleman would put
his top hat upon watching the show and
that's when I read up on this and
learned that the reason why the magician
pulls a rabbit out of a top hat is
because they got the top hat from
someone in the
audience but now no one has top hats
soing their own right so if I get your
top hat in the day that was a familiar
object not today but I actually own a
top hat I had to get one just kind of
pop open I had to cuz I just wanted you
like a hat don't you I want to feel just
what that was like but in that day that
was a familiar object yes and then you
reach in and pull a rabbit out of it and
then clearly the random person didn't
have a rabbit in their hat so the
magician produced the rabbit in the Hat
but now they have to show you the hat
and show you that there's nothing in it
y right right and that's why uh James
Randy the amazing Randy used to say that
uh a magician that are claimed to have
Supernatural powers and they were
bending keys and spoons the power of
that illusion was that these are
everyday objects yes but we don't go
around bending spoons and keys in our
house because that would render them
unusable so that's a bad idea to bend
your spoon and your keys and so you have
sort of like the false assumption that
they're very hard to bend but they're
not we just don't do
it how we interact with our familiar
objects sets limit
and what we think is even possible to be
done to them yes exactly cool okay so
you're studying this stage
magic is there any way that what
magicians have been doing and now do at
such a sophisticated level enabling your
field of research to say we could take
that and use it for the benefit of
others not not in entertainment but say
people who might have ADHD or some other
problem so you're asking are they
learning anything from magicians yes
that's what you're asking that was the
shorter
version yes are we learning anything
from magicians well the Neuroscience of
magic it's uh it's still young uh I
would say yes we are we are learning
from magicians but this is early stages
we are not going to uh find you know
next year a cure for Alzheimer's based
on what magician are are showing us but
but just in terms of um magicians in uh
they
manipulate attention memory um decision
making all sorts of cognitive processes
that they can get impaired and they do
get impaired in a number of ways from uh
from trauma from aging from disease and
and so on and so understanding what's
happening in the brain better when these
processes are manipulated is going to uh
hopefully lead us to better Paths of uh
treatment and just diagnosis and and so
on is it possible for the person who's
experiencing the magic to have a
permanent change within them possibly
for the good I think magic like any form
of great art can have a longlasting
effect but the act of the magic itself
the magic trick and the reveal and the
surprise I believe that the very fact
that this is temporary is part of the
charm just having this Wonder this
surprise we wouldn't be able to sustain
it and remember anything that gets
sustained in the brain the brain ignores
so just the fact that it's ephemeris
that we can't hold that feeling I think
that makes it more powerful that's a
good answer it is that's why our guest
is here that was a damn good answer you
said we're only just beginning to
explore how magicians are working with
our attention and on awareness is that
because over the past however
long they weren't trusted they were seen
as as what Neil called charlatans before
I think there's um number of reasons I
think in general it tends to be
difficult for artists and scientists to
collaborate because we just moved in
different spheres generally we don't
have a Common Language I think it's
becoming EAS here because now we're all
much more connected than we used to be
but also in terms of magic perhaps magic
has been historically less accessible to
science than say Visual Arts because
there's a secrecy inherent to Magic that
is not so for other art forms yeah very
good point I'm not telling you how I'm
doing it right don't ask yeah I'm not
even going to write it anywhere I'm
going to that's just it tell it by Word
of Mouth to my progyny so I want try to
bring some final Focus to this there's
your preconceptions as a just as a human
being what is natural for everyone but
then a person could have social cultural
preconceptions that will bias them to
see a trick in one way versus
another and I came to tell her with a
just a question about the skeptic's
movement because many people believe
something is true and how do you
demonstrate that it's not you know they
famously had a show on Showtime called
where someone made a claim and
they would just show that it's not true
so I'm intrigued how people think about
fixing a preconception you might have if
that preconception is false let's see
what teller has to say so teller what's
the association between magicians or
your style of magic and the Skeptics
movement after who did he tried to get
in touch with his mother with Spirit
mediums he became disillusioned at that
and began to become angry about it and
that anger has continued through a
number of generations of magicians you
know we we all know Randy whose anger on
that was the amazing Randy very high but
uh other other people like um I think
John Nal masculine was
also a spirit exposer it is very
unpleasant to see your art form turned
into a crooked Opera operation that
hurts people well when you say hurts
people aren't people don't people
believe they're being served by
charlatans who enable them to think
they're communicating with the dead does
it bring any Solace to the people at all
it may for some but there's there's
something that's very disturbing about
someone take the most important thing
the most important memories I have of my
parents I wouldn't want to see those
disrupted destroyed poisoned by being
cheapened to the kinds of things that
people are told by their Spirit mediums
but so much of the world's religions
have something to say about what happens
to you when you die that's a that's a
thing I mean somehow the human state of
mind I don't want to say it requires it
but it certainly desires it and this is
just another branch of that exercise
isn't it you're you're just teasing me
aren't you you're just
you don't believe that for one second no
no just people pray to to their dead
loved ones I mean probably billions of
people do this right and probably
billions of very evily earned dollars
come out of it yeah you know there is
something wrong about teaching people a
false view of the the universe it's just
something fundamentally wrong about it
so what I found interesting was right at
the end that says a false view of the
universe that surely must resonate for
you it does I'd like objective reality
please but did you expect it to come out
of the mouth a teller who doesn't speak
but of a magician did you did you think
in a conversation withan that's why he
is a he's a principled magician yeah he
has a worldview of what role magic
should play in all our lives listening
to that you hear a certain anger but
it's all calm he's not ranting and
thumping and Ang it's a calm anger
because it's his own people who are who
are the charlatans and taking advantage
of that and because he's been dealing
with this for so many years yeah well
Susanna this has been a delight so do
you have a a a footprint on the internet
yes you can Google me you'll find me
it's not hard and what's your so Susanna
Martinez con just Susanna with an s s u
s n a Susanna we will totally find you
so you're the lab you direct the
laboratory of
Integrative Neuroscience Neuroscience
that has a web page as well okay so we
can track your work there yes love it
and let me remind people of your two
books the one with the best title ever
slights of mind you like that don't you
love it by uh Holt the publisher they
published my book um Star Messenger so
they
should and more recently a book
champions of Illusion what what was that
book about we forgot to talk the
champions of Illusion is uh about the
some of the best illusions that have
competed and won in the best illusion of
the Year contest which I host every year
oh very good that's for another episode
all right all right well again thank you
for being a guest thank you for having
me this was a lot of fun all right Gary
always good to hang out with you
pleasure my friend all right this has
been yet another episode of Stark talk
special edition the mind brain and
Illusions you Tyson here as always
bidding you to keep looking up
[Music]